here is my grand vision, i'm calling it amoebius. it is an everything orchestrator.

amoebius is a haskell binary that runs as a cli tool, a host level daemon with sudo powers, and also a singleton service daemon (exactly one pod) running in a k8s node, deployed via helm chart. i'ts main job is to manage k8s cluster lifecycle, interpret a .dhall based amoebius DSL into opinionated helm deployments and cluster configs, and (sometimes) deploy, integrate, and manage host-level daemons with the k8s cluster.

unlike the normal complexity of configuring and managing a k8s cluster, gateway, dns, and certs, the amoebius DSL makes it impossible to represent illegal or unsafe state. 

there are two kinds of clusters amoebius can manage: self-managed (kind or rke2) or provider managed (AKS). they work slightly differently.


it treats multiple substrates as first class citizens: apple silicon, windows, linux (with optional cuda support). it can also support virtualized substrates where avialable -- eg apple can support linux substrates via a lima VM, windows can support linux substrates via WSL2. the binary always lives on the host however. once the binary is built from a substrate-specific boostrap .sh (whose main job is to install ghcup, build the binary, and run its bootstrap command), the takes responsibility for the remainder of the boostrap. amoebius is k8s centric. it supports kind, rke2, and AKS as first class citizens. it supports mixed arch clusters (amd64 and arm64). it does not support windows containers (in or outside WSL2). however it can build and manage host-level non-containerized worker nodes, in order to access substrate specific hardware that doesn't play well with containers or VMs. canonical examples of this are ML workloads: a) GPU work with Apple Metal, and b) cuda stacks on windows which don't work performantly from within WSL2. When such host level worker binaries are used, they are a) built directly on the host (or in a tart VM in the case of swift builds on Apple), b) managed as subprocesses by the host level amoebius binary.

There is also a niche substrate amoebius can handle: machines that dual boot linux and windows, where the same k8s cluster with the same control plane, and storage etc (literally the same cluster!) can run in both the linux metal boot and the windows under WSL2 boot. 

one general feature of amoebuis is than an amoebius cluster can spawn one or more child clusters, who can, in turn, spawn children of there own. this motivates the name amoebius. 

the host binary has a bootstrap command (with a mandatory cli flag for ) where it a) detects the substrate (Apple, linux-cuda, linux cpu, Windows),

note that, when using fully managed k8s clusters like AKS, a) there is no host binary (since there is no direct access to the host), b) there is no "bootstrap", instead it's provisioned via AWS keys over the API c) consequently, fully managed d) the highest-level parent will generally be a kind cluster running on an admin's personal machine, or a single node rke2 cluster.

Amoebius never relies on envrionment variables, direclty or indirectly -- that includes path. When a host-level tool is needed, amoebius lazily a) checks the appropriate package manager for the substrate to see if it's installed, b) uses the package manager to install it if it isn't installed, c) uses the package manger itself to obtain the full path of that binary, d) call commands in subprocesses entirely by calling the full path.




b) configures the enviornment as require to support .dhall, that has a) instructions for which k8s substrate will be used, and b) any credentials needed to deploy them (eg ssh keys for k8s nodes, aws credentials). 

each ammoebius k8s cluster is always deployed with the same core services: harbor (all containers are cached locally and pulled from harbor, once harbor is up and responsive), MinIO, hashicorp vault, pulsar, prometheus/grafana, keycloak. there is always a LoadBalancer available in k8s-- either a cloud native LB, or barring that MetalLB. All services run on an HA basis. whenever we use postgres, it must be patroni backed via the percona plugin. each service requiring postgres gets a separate deployment, with its own pgadmin. keycloak manages all ingress from the wild (including localhost connections) through the LB via the k8s gateway api. the only exception to the LB->Keycloak rule is that the amoebius binary on the host can a) directly talk to the kubeapi via the default mTLS created by the k8s distro, as well as the cluster amoebius daemon and b) the host binary can deploy other host level services outside of the k8s cluster which can talk to the cluster's services via NodePort. (k8s deployments are generally preferred, but sometimes host level services are needed for platform reasons, eg an inference engine that wants to use apple silicon's unified memory) these access points are strictly available from the localhost, there is to be no WAN or LAN access. 

cluster durable storage model: PVCs are only ever created by StatefulSets in helm charts. those PVCs must always have minimum sizes. we only ever use a "default" kubernets.io/no-provisioner storage class, deleting all other default storage classes. we only create manual PVs that are explicitly bound to the PVCs. the PVs should follow a naming convention <namespace>/<statefulset>/pv_<integer>. PVs are generally bound to the host. they should have sizes. we should hard-allocate those sizes and ensure more storage than that cannot be allocated. in AWS each PV should be its own EBS drive sized to exactly match the PVC it's designed to pair with. I think there's a plugin that helps with this ? either way, the PV should not be tied to the lifecycle of the EKS node / ec2 instance associated with the node. genearlly speaking, clusters are ephemeral but their storage is not, and need to be explicitly deleted. they don't get deleted automatically with the rest of the cluster, so that they automatically rebind. 

deployed containers must always specify cpu and ram explictly. 

after the cluster is boostrapped, and all the core services are running and reachable, it is ready to be initilized : init vault, give it its amoebius .dhall

HA amoebius behaviour, including leadership elections

root single node "prodbox" behaviour, including init to password encrypted vault keys, failover



## Amoebius Apps

An amoebius app consists of two things a) one or more (potentially publically available) container images / Dockerfile that builds correctly for both amd64 and arm64 architectures b) an app spec .dhall file satisfying certain criteria, including what services (if any) are LB services, the rules for keycloaked backed auth, any durable storage required (MinIO, block storage, postgres), and pulsar topic lifecycles.

There is a generic & reusable helm chart for amoebius apps. This does not have to be provided explicitly, the values will be populated automatically and managed dynamically (eg dynamic replicas). Amoebius translates the app requirements into services, statefulsets, etc 

In genearal, each app a) must have a name unique for that cluster b) is deployed in its own namespace with the same name c) may create one or more MinIO buckets named according to <app_name>/<bucket_name> d) may provision block storage using the kubernetes.io/no-provisioner storage policy e) may request a postgres DB that will live in the same namespace.

ways amoebius will help refactor existing projects:
~/jitML and ~/infernix: both are ML related projects that support multiple hardware substrates, in particular Apple Silicon Metal, nvidia cuda, and general linux. the awkwardnes of apple metal is that it must run on the host, it cannot run in a container. these projects currently use a two tiered solution: a) on apple silicon, a host level haskell binary managers the envrionment by installing packages from brew lazily (as required), including build tools. ~/jitML uses Swift builds in a Tart VM (also managed). calls to brew installed packages should use the full explicit path, which should be lazily retrieved as needed (using brew --prefix).

In an amoebius centric world a) only amoebius would need to own the bootstrap .sh files (they don't install brew packages, they just ensure brew is installed, ensure ghcup is installed via brew, install ghc 9.14.1 and cabal 3.16.1.0, ensure they are available on the host, build the project haskell binary, than call tool bootstrap; it takes over from there, installing brew packages as needed for build tools and other dependencies, including tart vm for swift builds.)

amoebius would be exclusively responsible for k8s cluster management, treating kind, rke2, and aks all as first class citiziens. (aks clusters, along with all pulumi deploys of all assets, only happens within an existing amoebius cluster, using MinIO as the backend and vault envelope encryption for that backend)

amoebius is also responsible for DNS (eg route53) and TLS certs (eg zerossl). look at ~/prodbox in particular for examples of this

in general amoebius should avoid using host level env variables, including path. evertyhing should be lazily discoverable via introspection, and anything that isn't should be in the .dhall config. we want to use sound FP principles, including applicatives wherever possible to parallelize work (eg multiple independent pulumi deploys).

via pulumi, amoebous may spawn other k8s clusters, either kind or rke2 (via one or more ssh keys for the nodes), or aks. in all cases these deployments are to be tacked using pulumi, using minio backend, locally encrypted via vault transport engine. note that aks cluster do not support apple silicon substrate, or allow anything analogous to a host level daemon-- they can permit the singlton stateless amoebius daemon on cluster however, which without loss of generality can reach and manage the control plane for that cluster. 

currently ~/mattandjames simulates an HA deployment in kind via deploying multiple kind clusters. in fact, we always use an HA stack with the same components-- it's just a question of how many replicas we use. this is set declaratively via the amoebius cluster.dhall, which in turn is initially populated during boostrap. the boostrap.sh should require --distro={kind,rke2}. kind can optionally include --replicas=n, defaulting to 1 if not specificed. however we still use the same HA helm charts, even when replicas are all one. (eg postgres only ever gets deployed via patroni using the percona operator). another area amoebius can help ~/mattandjames is to replace its custom LLM inference with a workflow supported by ~/infernix. currently ~/mattandjames has a naive inference engine that is cpu only. it also deploys itself exclusively on kind, in a mock 3 replica mode. this is overly restrictive. if ~/mattandjames is boiled down to application logic only, a single amoebius .dhall can configure k8s cluster distro, replication count, model inference substrate (apple metal on host, cuda on cluster, ) with zero extra effort from the application itself. in that sense infernix can be regarded as an amoebius extension : a single haskell binary that can be deployed as a distributed system either at node system level (in an apple cluster) or cluster level (as a stateless deployment). the infernix .dhall can be contained inside the an amoebius.dhall. the amoebius.dhall for one or 

in general, all an app needs to be deployed on amoebius is a container (public or built from Dockerfile) and a .dhall for that app.

unlike kubernetes, amobebius .dhall makes it impossible to represent invalid / non-working / insecure state. for example, illegal durable storage, improperly configured geateway, dns that binds to the wrong ip address, PVCs that don't bind to PVs, pods that can't deploy because of taints & affinities, network policies that stop services from reaching each other, or accidentally exposing backdoor insecure ingress are all impossible to represent-- the amoebius .dhall makes this impossible to represent . when a new amoebius.dhall is rolled out, it is always rolled out from the root cluster (typicaly a kind cluster on the admin's laptop). that root cluster's kind owns the (self-signed) PKI trust anchor for everything else on the cluster. child clusters only get given their own amoebius .dhall (including their childrens') but they no nothing about other clusters. regarding vault shamir unseals and root tokens, clusters can be configured one of two ways a) they unseal themselves by accessing a k8s secret, or b) the parent owns the secret and they request an unlock. the root node owns its ow nsecret but in a password encrypted format that requires human interaction. the human provides this password on root cluster init. 

clusters also support horizontal failover, ie two or more clusters with the same parent can be geographically replicated (using built in idioms like pulsar, MinIO, postgres etc) and automatically failover if they detect a problem with the lead's gateway. they will repoint dns themselves via eg route53 migrations. this could be particularly useful for eg a VPN host which "flattens" the node network topology. 

an amoebius .dhall should also be able to represent things like dynamic node provision based on arbitrary logic, like load, spot instance compute cost, or completion of a particular workflow. clusters can be torn down and spun back up ephemerally with zero data loss because of our no-provisioner PVC/PV policy, which guarantees identical rebinding.

the key to making amoeibus really work well is a great .dhall DSL that ties everything together. total composability. secrets should not live in dhall, only some name for secrets. parents directly inject the secrets into the child's vault. complex services can be represented but a valid amoebius .dhall cannnot represent any illegal state. 

open question : how does the host amoebius binary, and any managed subprocesses, communicate with its daemon on the cluster ? options are: a) same keycloak/envoy gateway api as everything else b) separate NodePort not accessible to the cluster (with mTLS issued by root) c) linux socket. additionally, amoebius will need to grant eg the infernix service on apple silicon and minio on the cluster. should that pass back through amoebius for safety, or should there also be ingress rules there ? a linux socket is attractive as it hard guarantees no malicious network traffic using this as a back door, it just means all (potentially large) i/o for MinIO and pulsar get bottlenecked through this path. NodePort is also an option, but then the options are either i) an insecure connection, or ii) an mTLS connection for high bandwith, again adding overhead. 

the test suite for amoebius requires special consideration because there are many possible. one thing for sure : the credentials used for testing eg AWS deployments need to be specifically flagged (as we do in ~/prodbox). the test suite itself may be run by an amoebius root. in fact the amoebus tests should be an amoebus.dhall that spins up resources, runs workflow, and tears down resources-- using exactly the sort of arbitrary logic i described earlier. 

there's all kinds of tests we can run. we don't need an explicit list of tests; we need a general test .dhall topology (which, by definition, always tears down the resources it creates). there should also be a suggest-test command, which a) detects the current substrate, including compute, memory, and storage available and b) takes SSH and aws credentials, inspecting the machine resources and permissions associated with those aws credentials. it should then write a test .dhall which a) spins up a representative set of resources, and b) simulates HA failovers, host daemon leadership elections, etc as required.

we also want TLA+ for all distributed consensus problems that aren't already handed by systems that do their own distributed consensus and georeplication (minio, pulsar, postgres, etc). synchronous HA is basically guaranteed lossless already, but asynchronous georeplication gets tricky. what exactly happens if a cluster goes down mid geo-sync and we try to failover the gateway to that cluster ? we need to prove we always have well defined behaviour (somehow, and even define what that means)

open questions : can the root cluster be multi node or does it have to be a single node kind/rke2 cluster ? the issue is that a multi node setup requires secrets (either ssh keys or aws creds), which would violate the no-secrets-in-dhall rule.

if we require the root cluster to be single node, we can bootstrap the cluster without any secrets, then use one of several root init commands.

in general we need semantics around cluster manifest changes, and proofs of correctness / that there won't be a degenerate or broken state. things like db schema migrations need to be automated. 

do we want first class support for wireguard vpn / linkerd service mesh? we would need semantics like : root node deploys HA cluster, cluster configures wireguard gateway, all clusters (including root) get a VPN ip from that gateway, linkerd service mesh is now active. this may be redundant with envoy though : if clusters already have their own secure gateways, arbitrary access to internal services can already be granted. 

one sidenote about .dhall and GHC 9.14.1 : due to version limitations in hackage, it is necessary to use the allow-newer feature. 